Rules, Ancient Scripts and Texts mentioning Chaturanga and Board
Comparison between Different Variants and Causes of the Differences
Board Layout (8×8)
8 | ♜ ● . . . . . ♜
7 | ♞ ● . . . . . ♞
6 | ♝ ● . . . . . ♝
5 | ♛ ● → . . . . .
4 | . . . . . ← ● ♛
3 | . . . ↑ . . ● ♝
2 | ● ● ● ● . . ● ♞
1 | ♜ ♞ ♝ ♛ . . ● ♜
    a b c d e f g h
(● = Pawn / Nar)
Symbols / Legend
●  → नर  (Nar / Pawn)
♜ → रथ (Rath / Rook)
♞ → अश्व (Ashva / Horse)
♝ → हाथी (Hathi / Elephant)
♛ → राजन (Rajan / King)
Points per Piece (PPP)
नर (Pawn)      : 1 point
अश्व (Horse)   : 3 - 3.5 points
हाथी (Elephant): 2 - 2.5 points
रथ (Rook)      : 5 points
राजन (King)   : ∞ points
Roll of Die / डाला
1 → रथ
3 → अश्व
4 → हाथी
6 → नर / राजन
Minor / Major Pieces
Minor Pieces : नर, अश्व, हाथी
Major Pieces : रथ, अश्व, राजन
Minor pieces cannot capture Major pieces.
But Major pieces can capture any piece.
Game Type:
Team Up Game
Pieces Movement Rules
1) नर (Pawn)
Can only move forward by one square
Captures diagonally
Different from chess pawn → It cannot play 2 squares forward in first move
2) रथ (Rook)
Moves exactly like chess rook
Cannot jump over pieces
3) हाथी (Elephant) – Different Versions
I) Version I
Moves exactly 2 squares diagonally, jumping over any piece.
\   /
  H
/   \
II) Version II
Moves exactly 2 squares in any direction
↑   ↑   ↑
←   H   →
↓   ↓   ↓
III) Version III
One step diagonally OR one step forward
(Inspired from Thai/Burmese chess – Represents 4 legs trunk of elephant)
\  ↑  /
   H
/     \
4) अश्व (Horse)
L-shape movement
Similar to the knight of chess
5) राजन (King)
Moves one step in any direction
More Game Rules
I) Minor cannot capture Major, but Major can capture any piece.
II) To win: Kill the kings of opponent team (2 players → 2 kings).
III) King can comeback to the game by killing the king of opponent (at least one king) and keep it anywhere.
IV) If a king is killed twice, he cannot come back to the game and player cannot move any piece.
V) Promotion of G2:
Corresponding piece to the board gets the G2 promotion
Can get promoted to king
Can capture pieces of opponent (except king)
Victory Conditions
Checkmate
Boring the King: Capturing all the pieces of the opponent
Stalemate: If you cannot make a move, you lose
Agreement of draw or resign
Here is the verbatim (as-is) typed extraction of the handwritten page you shared, keeping wording, spelling, and structure as close as possible to the original:
The game of Chaturanga is different and distinct from other similar board games – chess, shogi, xiangqi or checkers.
It involves the “uncertainty element” of dice as a player has to compulsorily make the best move of the piece whose number appears on the dice.
Separate decision trees and integrating the minimax algorithm with alpha-beta pruning would serve out a good result for the Probabilistic Game of Chess.
Yes, Chaturanga is the Probabilistic Game of Chess with distinct rules played mostly among four players with team up.
The draw by stalemate is absent and the player who does the stalemate wins.
The Queen, the most powerful chess piece after King is not present in the game; there is no such rule like “castling” and the king has a chance to comeback onto the board once if their teammate gets to capture the king of their opponent and the king has the freedom to get placed on any vacant (unoccupied) square of the Ashtāpada.
Chaturanga could be called as the Indian version and the ancestor of Modern Chess (or western chaturanga).
